Postmortem report for incident on Aug 26, 2024 (#473)
openSUSE/obs-landing: _posts/deployments/2024-08-26-post-mortem.md

As a result, when the system attempted to create a notification for an event with a long description in its payload, an exception was raised, causing the notification creation process to fail.

## Detection

We received the first Grafana alert on Friday, August 23rd at 15:00 UTC, indicating that no notifications had been sent in the last three hours. Upon checking Errbit, we found a single exception with over 100,000 occurrences

## Root Cause

The root cause of the problem was a mismatch in column sizes between the `payload` field in the `events` table and the `event_payload` field in the `notifications` table. Because of this mismatch, when the system attempted to create a notification from an event with a very long description in its payload, an exception was raised, that blocked the creation of further email and web notifications.

## Resolution
<!--
  How did you resolve or work around this problem?
  For customers and community to understand what happened technically.
-->

> When a notification creation failed, the system created a backup of the corresponding event before deleting it. We were able to identify the problematic event, take a backup, and then delete it. After this, the system began to recover gradually.

Reviewer: This is not what has happened. We created this "backup" manually.

### Action Items

<!--
  Are there any actions we are going to do that are not done yet?
  For customers and community to be able to follow up on this.
-->

Additionally we have created some follow up action items:

| Action Item | Owner |
|---          |---    |
| [Data migration to update column size](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/16751) | Developer Team |

## Lessons Learned
<!--
  Describe what went well, what went wrong and where we go lucky during the resolution of this problem.
-->

> - Ensure all connected tables have the same column sizes.

Reviewer: How?

Author: There is not only one way to do this. This requires knowledge of the system architecture. 
One thing I can point out for this is a through review.

Reviewer: The this isn't something we learned. We know we should do code-review :)

Reviewer: Maybe it rather points to a bad architectural decision that we should revise?

Author: I've improved this reasoning :slightly_smiling_face:

---
layout: post

> title: "Degraded performance of OBS Web and Email Notifications system"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Service degradation of OBS Web and Email Notifications system"
```

category: deployments
author: Rubhan Azeem <rubhan.azeem@suse.com>
---

> <!--
>   Classify the severity of this problem. We usually say:
>   - service degradation: if only a few customers where impacted
>   - severe service degradation: if nearly every customer was impacted
>   - downtime: if every visit to the OBS ended up on some error page
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Maybe this will be the excerpt on the index page back...

Our Email and Web notifications system experienced a service degradation.

> <!--
>   What happened, for how long and who was impacted by it?
>   For customers to be able to identify if their problem related to this post mortem or not.
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> On Friday, August 23rd at 11:59 UTC, Email and Web notifications stopped working until August 26th at 10:16 UTC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No user of build.opensuse.org received notifications via the web interface / email from Friday, August 23rd at 11:59 UTC until Monday, August 26th at 10:16 UTC. No notification / email was lost, all of them got delivered with a delay. Some of them with a delay of several days.
```

> In the notification creation process, the `payload` field in the `events` table is copied to the `event_payload` field in the `notifications` table. These fields are required to have the same column size, but we discovered they don't have the same size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cause of this was mis-matching database table column size restrictions we did not notice. 
```

> As a result, when the system attempted to create a notification for an event with a long description in its payload, an exception was raised, causing the notification creation process to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, when the system attempted to create a notification an exception was raised, causing the notification creation process to fail entirely.
```

## Detection

> We received the first Grafana alert on Friday, August 23rd at 15:00 UTC, indicating that no notifications had been sent in the last three hours. Upon checking Errbit, we found a single exception with over 100,000 occurrences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We received the first alert on Friday, August 23rd at 15:00 UTC, indicating that no notifications had been sent in the last three hours.
```

## Root Cause

> The root cause of the problem was a mismatch in column sizes between the `payload` field in the `events` table and the `event_payload` field in the `notifications` table. Because of this mismatch, when the system attempted to create a notification from an event with a very long description in its payload, an exception was raised, that blocked the creation of further email and web notifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In February we changed the size limitations of the `payload` field in the `events` table from TEXT to MEDIUMTEXT ([PR#15649](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/15649)). During the notification process we copy the content of this column to another to the `event_payload` field in the `notifications` table with it TEXT. This mismatch caused an exception to be raised when the system attempted to create a notification from an event with a very long `payload` column.

Additionally the queue the handles the notification creations work sequentially, with a very many retries and very long hold off time. That blocked the creation of *all* email and web notifications.
```

## Resolution

> <!--
>   How did you resolve or work around this problem?
>   For customers and community to understand what happened technically.
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> We were able to identify the problematic event, take a backup of that event, and then delete it. After this, the system began to recover gradually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We identified the problematic event and took it out of the queue. After this, the system began to recover itself gradually.
```

### Action Items

> <!--
>   Are there any actions we are going to do that are not done yet?
>   For customers and community to be able to follow up on this.
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Additionally we have created some follow up action items:

| Action Item | Owner |
|---          |---    |
| [Data migration to update column size](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/16751) | Developer Team |

> | [Improve exception handling](ihttps://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/16751#issuecomment-2309776466) | Developer Team |

Reviewer: A comment in a PR is not a way for us to track work...

> | [Improve exception handling](ihttps://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/16751#issuecomment-2309776466) | Developer Team |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [Improve exception handling](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/16751#issuecomment-2309776466) | Developer Team |
```

## Lessons Learned

> <!--
>   Describe what went well, what went wrong and where we go lucky during the resolution of this problem.
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - Ensure that all connected tables have consistent column sizes by thoroughly reviewing the system architecture. We recognize that there is close coupling of components, and this design can be improved.

Reviewer: And where are we going to do that? And when?

> - We had failed notifications in delayed jobs, and that saved us from data loss.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what you want to say here...
